---
title: "Data Science Toolbox"
date: 2018-08-30
tags: [python]
header:
  images:
excerpt: "Data Science Toolbox in Python"
---

## Write a Simple Function
Function bodies need to be indented by a consistent number of spaces and the choice of 4 is common.

```python
# Define the function shout
def shout():
    """Print a string with three exclamation marks"""
    # Concatenate the strings: shout_word
    shout_word= 'congratulations'+'!!!'

    # Print shout_word
    print(shout_word)

# Call shout
shout()
```

### Single-parameter functions
You have successfully defined and called your own function! That's pretty cool. We defined and called the function shout(), which printed out a string concatenated with '!!!'. We will now update shout() by adding a parameter so that it can accept and process any string argument passed to it. Also note that shout(word), the part of the header that specifies the function name and parameter(s), is known as the signature of the function. You may encounter this term in the wild!

```python
# Define shout with the parameter, word
def shout(word):
    """Print a string with three exclamation marks"""
    # Concatenate the strings: shout_word
    shout_word = word + '!!!'

    # Print shout_word
    print(shout_word)
# Call shout with the string 'congratulations'
shout('congratulations')
```

### Functions that return single values
Now we try our hand at another modification to the shout() function so that it now returns a single value instead of printing within the function. Recall that the return keyword lets us return values from functions. Returning values is generally more desirable than printing them out because, as we saw earlier, a print() call assigned to a variable has type NoneType.

```python
# Define shout with the parameter, word
def shout(word):
    """Return a string with three exclamation marks"""
    # Concatenate the strings: shout_word
    shout_word= word+'!!!'

    # Replace print with return
    return(shout_word)

# Pass 'congratulations' to shout: yell
yell=shout('congratulations')

# Print yell
print(yell)
```






<----------------------------------->
There are lots and lots of fantastic functions in Python and its library ecosystem. However, as a Data Scientist, we will constantly need to write own functions to solve problems that are dictated by your data. The art of function writing is what we will learn in this first Python Data Science toolbox course. We will write our very own custom functions, complete with multiple parameters and multiple return values, along with default arguments and variable-length arguments. We will gain insight into scoping in Python and be able to write lambda functions and handle errors in our very own function writing practice. On top of this, we will wrap up each topic by diving into using your acquired skills to write functions that analyze twitter DataFrames and are generalizable to broader Data Science contexts.

## The keyword global
We will use the keyword global within a function to alter the value of a variable defined in the global scope.

```python
# Create a string: team
team = "teen titans"
# Define change_team()
def change_team():
    """Change the value of the global variable team."""
    # Use team in global scope
    global team
    # Change the value of team in global: team
    team = "justice league"
# Print team
print(team)
# Call change_team()
change_team()
# Print team
print(team)
```

## Nested Functions
One reason why we would like to use nested functions is to avoid writing out the same computations within functions repeatedly. There's nothing new about defining nested functions: you simply define it as you would a regular function with def and embed it inside another function!

In this exercise, inside a function three_shouts(), we will define a nested function inner() that concatenates a string object with !!!. three_shouts() then returns a tuple of three elements, each a string concatenated with !!! using inner().

```python
# Define three_shouts
def three_shouts(word1, word2, word3):
    """Returns a tuple of strings
    concatenated with '!!!'."""

    # Define inner
    def inner(word):
        """Returns a string concatenated with '!!!'."""
        return word + '!!!'

    # Return a tuple of strings
    return (inner(word1),inner(word2), inner(word3))

# Call three_shouts() and print
print(three_shouts('a', 'b', 'c'))
```

Great job, we have just nested a function within another function. One other pretty cool reason for nesting functions is the idea of a closure. This means that the nested or inner function remembers the state of its enclosing scope when called. Thus, anything defined locally in the enclosing scope is available to the inner function even when the outer function has finished execution.

Let's move forward then! Here you will complete the definition of the inner function inner_echo() and then call echo() a couple of times, each with a different argument. Complete the exercise and see what the output will be!

```python
# Define echo
def echo(n):
    """Return the inner_echo function."""

    # Define inner_echo
    def inner_echo(word1):
        """Concatenate n copies of word1."""
        echo_word = word1 * n
        return echo_word

    # Return inner_echo
    return inner_echo

# Call echo: twice
twice = echo(2)

# Call echo: thrice
thrice = echo(3)

# Call twice() and thrice() then print
print(twice('hello'), thrice('hello'))
```
