---
title: "Importing Data in Python"
date: 2018-09-10
tags: [python]
header:
  images:
excerpt: "Importing Data in Python"
---

## Importing entire text files
We'll be working with the file moby_dick.txt. It is a text file that contains the opening sentences of Moby Dick, one of the great American novels! Here we'll get experience opening a text file, printing its contents to the shell and, finally, closing it.

```python
# Open a file: file
file = open('moby_dick.txt', mode='r')
# Print it
print(file.read())
# Check whether file is closed
print(file.closed)
# Close file
file.close()
# Check whether file is closed
print(file.closed)
```

## Importing text files line by line
For large files, we may not want to print all of their content to the shell: we may wish to print only the first few lines. Enter the readline() method, which allows you to do this. When a file called file is open, we can print out the first line by executing file.readline(). If we execute the same command again, the second line will print, and so on. We can bind a variable file by using a context manager construct. While still within this construct, the variable file will be bound to open('huck_finn.txt'); thus, to print the file to the shell, all the code we need to execute is:
```python
# Read & print the first 3 lines
with open('moby_dick.txt') as file:
    print(file.readline())
    print(file.readline())
    print(file.readline())
```

## Using NumPy to import flat files
We are now going to load the MNIST digit recognition dataset using the numpy function loadtxt(). The first argument will be the filename. The second will be the delimiter which, in this case, is a comma. You can find more information about the MNIST dataset [here](http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/) on the webpage of Yann LeCun, who is currently Director of AI Research at Facebook and Founding Director of the NYU Center for Data Science, among many other things.

```python
# Import package
import numpy as np
# Assign filename to variable: file
file = 'digits.csv'
# Load file as array: digits
digits = np.loadtxt(file, delimiter=",")
# Print datatype of digits
print(type(digits))
# Select and reshape a row
im = digits[21, 1:]
im_sq = np.reshape(im, (28, 28))
# Plot reshaped data (matplotlib.pyplot already loaded as plt)
plt.imshow(im_sq, cmap='Greys', interpolation='nearest')
plt.show()
```

What if there are rows, such as a header, that we don't want to import? What if our file has a delimiter other than a comma? What if we only wish to import particular columns? There are a number of arguments that np.loadtxt() takes that we'll find useful: delimiter changes the delimiter that loadtxt() is expecting, for example, we can use ',' and '\t' for comma-delimited and tab-delimited respectively; skiprows allows us to specify how many rows (not indices) we wish to skip; usecols takes a list of the indices of the columns we wish to keep. The file that we'll be importing, digits_header.txt, has a header and is tab-delimited.

```python
# Import numpy
import numpy as np
# Assign the filename: file
file = 'digits_header.txt'
# Load the data: data
data = np.loadtxt(file, delimiter="\t", skiprows=1, usecols=[0,2])
# Print data
print(data)
```

The file seaslug.txt has a text header, consisting of strings and is tab-delimited. These data consists of percentage of sea slug larvae that had metamorphosed in a given time period. Read more [here](http://www.stat.ucla.edu/projects/datasets/seaslug-explanation.html). Due to the header, if we try to import it as-is using np.loadtxt(), Python would throw us a ValueError and tell us that it could not convert string to float. There are two ways to deal with this: firstly, we can set the data type argument dtype equal to str (for string). Alternatively, we can skip the first row as we have seen before, using the skiprows argument.

```python
# Assign filename: file
file = 'seaslug.txt'
# Import file: data
data = np.loadtxt(file, delimiter='\t', dtype=str)
# Print the first element of data
print(data[0])
# Import data as floats and skip the first row: data_float
data_float = np.loadtxt(file, delimiter="\t", dtype=float, skiprows=1)
# Print the 10th element of data_float
print(data_float[9])
# Plot a scatterplot of the data
plt.scatter(data_float[:, 0], data_float[:, 1])
plt.xlabel('time (min.)')
plt.ylabel('percentage of larvae')
plt.show()
```

Much of the time we will need to import datasets which have different datatypes in different columns; one column may contain strings and another floats, for example. The function np.loadtxt() will freak at this. There is another function, np.genfromtxt(), which can handle such structures. If we pass dtype=None to it, it will figure out what types each column should be. There is also another function np.recfromcsv() that behaves similarly to np.genfromtxt(), except that its default dtype is None.

```python
# Assign the filename: file
file = 'titanic.csv'
# Import file using np.recfromcsv: d
d=np.recfromcsv(file,delimiter=',',names=True,dtype=None)
# Print out first three entries of d
print(d[:3])
```

## Using pandas to import flat files as DataFrames
We were able to import flat files containing columns with different datatypes as numpy arrays. However, the DataFrame object in pandas is a more appropriate structure in which to store such data and, thankfully, we can easily import files of mixed data types as DataFrames using the pandas functions read_csv() and read_table().

```python
# Import pandas as pd
import pandas as pd
# Assign the filename: file
file = 'titanic.csv'
# Read the file into a DataFrame: df
df = pd.read_csv('titanic.csv')
# View the head of the DataFrame
print(df.head())
```

We were able to import flat files into a pandas DataFrame. As a bonus, it is then straightforward to retrieve the corresponding numpy array using the attribute values.

```python
# Assign the filename: file
file = 'digits.csv'
# Read the first 5 rows of the file into a DataFrame: data
data=pd.read_csv(file,nrows=5,header=None)
# Build a numpy array from the DataFrame: data_array
data_array= np.array(data.values)
# Print the datatype of data_array to the shell
print(type(data_array))
```

The pandas package is also great at dealing with many of the issues we will encounter when importing data as a data scientist, such as comments occurring in flat files, empty lines and missing values. Note that missing values are also commonly referred to as NA or NaN. We're now going to import a slightly corrupted copy of the Titanic dataset titanic_corrupt.txt, which contains comments after the character '#' is tab-delimited.

```python
# Import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Assign filename: file
file = 'titanic_corrupt.txt'
# Import file: data
data = pd.read_csv(file, sep="\t", comment= '#', na_values= ['Nothing'])
# Print the head of the DataFrame
print(data.head())
# Plot 'Age' variable in a histogram
pd.DataFrame.hist(data[['Age']])
plt.xlabel('Age (years)')
plt.ylabel('count')
plt.show()
```

## Loading a pickled file
There are a number of datatypes that cannot be saved easily to flat files, such as lists and dictionaries. If we want our files to be human readable, we may want to save them as text files in a clever manner. JSONs, which we will see later, are appropriate for Python dictionaries. However, if we merely want to be able to import them into Python, we can serialize them. All this means is converting the object into a sequence of bytes, or a bytestream. We'll import the pickle package, open a previously pickled data structure from a file and load it.

```python
# Import pickle package
import pickle
# Open pickle file and load data: d
with open('data.pkl', 'rb') as file:
    d = pickle.load(file)
# Print d
print(d)
# Print datatype of d
print(type(d))
```

## Listing sheets in Excel files
Whether we like it or not, any working data scientist will need to deal with Excel spreadsheets at some point in time. We won't always want to do so in Excel, however! Here, we'll learn how to use pandas to import Excel spreadsheets and how to list the names of the sheets in any loaded .xlsx file. We can retrieve a list of the sheet names using the attribute spreadsheet.sheet_names. Specifically, we'll be loading and checking out the spreadsheet 'battledeath.xlsx', modified from the Peace Research Institute Oslo's (PRIO) dataset. This data contains age-adjusted mortality rates due to war in various countries over several years.

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Assign spreadsheet filename: file
file = 'battledeath.xlsx'
# Load spreadsheet: xl
xl = pd.ExcelFile(file)
# Print sheet names
print(xl.sheet_names)
```

We saw that the Excel file contains two sheets, '2002' and '2004'. The next step is to import these. We'll learn how to import any given sheet of your loaded .xlsx file as a DataFrame. We'll be able to do so by specifying either the sheet's name or its index.

```python
# Load a sheet into a DataFrame by name: df1
df1 = xl.parse(1)
# Print the head of the DataFrame df1
print(df1.head())
# Load a sheet into a DataFrame by index: df2
df2=xl.parse(0)
# Print the head of the DataFrame df2
print(df2.head())
```

We will parse our spreadsheets and use additional arguments to skip rows, rename columns and select only particular columns. As before, we'll use the method parse(). This time, however, we'll add the additional arguments skiprows, names and parse_cols. These skip rows, name the columns and designate which columns to parse, respectively. All these arguments can be assigned to lists containing the specific row numbers, strings and column numbers, as appropriate.

```python
# Parse the first sheet and rename the columns: df1
df1 = xl.parse(0, skiprows=[0], names=['Country','AAM due to War (2002)'])
# Print the head of the DataFrame df1
print(df1.head())
# Parse the first column of the second sheet and rename the column: df2
df2 = xl.parse(1, parse_cols= [0], skiprows=[0], names=['Country'])
# Print the head of the DataFrame df2
print(df2.head())
```
