---
title: "Introduction to Python"
date: 2018-08-22
tags: [python]
header:
  images:
excerpt: "Basics of Python Language"
---

## Python as a Calculator

Python is perfectly suited to do basic calculations. Apart from addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, there is also support for more advanced operations such as exponentiation and modulo.
The code in the script on the right gives some examples.

```python
print(5 + 5)      # Addition
print(5 - 5)      # Subtraction
print(3 * 5)      # Multiplication
print(10 / 2)     # Division
print(4 ** 2)     # Exponentiation
```

## Variable Assignment

In Python, a variable allows you to refer to a value with a name. Remember, = in Python means assignment, it doesn't test equality!. To create a variable use =, like this example:
```python
# Create a variable savings
savings = 100
# Print out savings
print(savings)
# Create a variable factor
factor = 1.10
# Calculate result
result = savings * (factor**7)
# Print out result
print(result)
```

## Other Variable Types

In the previous example, you worked with two Python data types:
1. int, or integer: a number without a fractional part. e.g. 100.
2. float, or floating point: a number that has both an integer and fractional part, separated by a point. e.g. 10.1.

Next to numerical data types, there are two other very common data types:
3. str, or string: a type to represent text. You can use single or double quotes to build a string.
4. bool, or boolean: a type to represent logical values. Can only be True or False (the capitalization is important!).

```python
# Create a variable desc
desc = "compound interest"
# Create a variable profitable
profitable = True
```

## Operations with Other Types

Different types behave differently in Python. When you sum two strings, you'll get different behavior than when you sum two integers or two booleans. In the script some variables with different types have already been created. It's up to you to use them.

```python
savings = 100
factor = 1.1
desc = "compound interest"
# Assign product of factor and savings to year1
year1 = savings * factor
# Print the type of year1
print(type(year1))
# Assign sum of desc and desc to doubledesc
doubledesc = desc + desc
# Print out doubledesc
print(doubledesc)
```

## Type Conversion

Using the + operator to paste together two strings can be very useful in building custom messages. Suppose, for example, that you've calculated the return of your investment and want to summarize the results in a string.
print("I started with $" + savings + " and now have $" + result + ". Awesome!")
This will not work, though, as you cannot simply sum strings and floats.

To fix the error, you'll need to explicitly convert the types of your variables. More specifically, you'll need str(), to convert a value into a string. Similar functions such as int(), float() and bool() will help you convert Python values into any type.

```python
# Definition of savings and result
savings = 100
result = 100 * 1.10 ** 7
# Fix the printout
print("I started with $" + str(savings) + " and now have $" + str(result) + ". Awesome!")
# Definition of pi_string
pi_string = "3.1415926"
# Convert pi_string into float: pi_float
pi_float = float(pi_string)
```

## Create a list

As opposed to int, bool etc., a list is a compound data type. After measuring the height of your family, you decide to collect some information on the house you're living in. The areas of the different parts of your house are stored in separate variables for now, as shown in the script.

```python
# area variables (in square meters)
hall = 11.25
kit = 18.0
liv = 20.0
bed = 10.75
bath = 9.50
# Create list areas
areas= [hall, kit, liv, bed, bath]
print(areas)
```

### Create List with Different Types
A list can contain any Python type. Although it's not really common, a list can also contain a mix of Python types including strings, floats, booleans, etc. The printout of the previous exercise wasn't really satisfying. It's just a list of numbers representing the areas, but you can't tell which area corresponds to which part of your house.

The code below is the start of a solution. For some of the areas, the name of the corresponding room is already placed in front. Pay attention here! "bathroom" is a string, while bath is a variable that represents the float 9.50 you specified earlier.

```python
# area variables (in square meters)
hall = 11.25
kit = 18.0
liv = 20.0
bed = 10.75
bath = 9.50
# Adapt list areas
areas = ["hallway", hall, "kitchen", kit, "living room", liv, "bedroom", bed, "bathroom", bath]
print(areas)
```

### List of Lists
As a data scientist, you'll often be dealing with a lot of data, and it will make sense to group some of this data. Instead of creating a flat list containing strings and floats, representing the names and areas of the rooms in your house, you can create a list of lists. The script below can already give you an idea.
Don't get confused here: "hallway" is a string, while hall is a variable that represents the float 11.25 you specified earlier.

```python
# area variables (in square meters)
hall = 11.25
kit = 18.0
liv = 20.0
bed = 10.75
bath = 9.50
# house information as list of lists
house = [["hallway", hall],
         ["kitchen", kit],
         ["living room", liv],
         ["bedroom",bed],
         ["bathroom", bath]]
# Print out house
print(house)
# Print out the type of house
print(type(house))
```
