---
title: "Merging DataFrames with pandas"
date: 2018-10-15
tags: [python]
header:
  images:
excerpt: "Merging DataFrames with pandas"
---

## Reading DataFrames from multiple files
When data is spread among several files, we usually invoke pandas' read_csv() (or a similar data import function) multiple times to load the data into several DataFrames. The data files for this example have been derived from a [list of Olympic medals awarded between 1896 & 2008](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2012/jun/25/olympic-medal-winner-list-data) compiled by the Guardian. The column labels of each DataFrame are NOC, Country, & Total where NOC is a three-letter code for the name of the country and Total is the number of medals of that type won (bronze, silver, or gold).

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Read 'Bronze.csv' into a DataFrame: bronze
bronze = pd.read_csv('Bronze.csv')
# Read 'Silver.csv' into a DataFrame: silver
silver =  pd.read_csv('Silver.csv')
# Read 'Gold.csv' into a DataFrame: gold
gold =  pd.read_csv('Gold.csv')
# Print the first five rows of gold
print(gold.head())
```

## Reading DataFrames from multiple files in a loop
Loading data from multiple files into DataFrames is more efficient in a loop or a list comprehension. Notice that this approach is not restricted to working with CSV files. That is, even if our data comes in other formats, as long as pandas has a suitable data import function, we can apply a loop or comprehension to generate a list of DataFrames imported from the source files. Here, we'll continue working with [The Guardian's Olympic medal dataset](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2012/jun/25/olympic-medal-winner-list-data).

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Create the list of file names: filenames
filenames = ['Gold.csv', 'Silver.csv', 'Bronze.csv']
# Create the list of three DataFrames: dataframes
dataframes = []
for filename in filenames:
    dataframes.append(pd.read_csv(filename))
# Print top 5 rows of 1st DataFrame in dataframes
print(dataframes[0].head())
```

## Combining DataFrames from multiple data files
In this exercise, we'll combine the three DataFrames from earlier exercises - gold, silver, & bronze - into a single DataFrame called medals. The approach we'll use here is clumsy. Later on in the course, we'll see various powerful methods that are frequently used in practice for concatenating or merging DataFrames. Remember, the column labels of each DataFrame are NOC, Country, and Total, where NOC is a three-letter code for the name of the country and Total is the number of medals of that type won.

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Make a copy of gold: medals
medals = gold.copy()
# Create list of new column labels: new_labels
new_labels = ['NOC', 'Country', 'Gold']
# Rename the columns of medals using new_labels
medals.columns = new_labels
# Add columns 'Silver' & 'Bronze' to medals
medals['Silver'] = silver['Total']
medals['Bronze'] = bronze['Total']
# Print the head of medals
print(medals.head())
```

## Sorting DataFrame with the Index & columns
It is often useful to rearrange the sequence of the rows of a DataFrame by sorting. We don't have to implement these yourself; the principal methods for doing this are .sort_index() and .sort_values(). In this exercise, we'll use these methods with a DataFrame of temperature values indexed by month names. We'll sort the rows alphabetically using the Index and numerically using a column. Notice, for this data, the original ordering is probably most useful and intuitive: the purpose here is for you to understand what the sorting methods do.

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Read 'monthly_max_temp.csv' into a DataFrame: weather1
weather1 = pd.read_csv('monthly_max_temp.csv',index_col='Month')
# Print the head of weather1
print(weather1.head())
# Sort the index of weather1 in alphabetical order: weather2
weather2 = weather1.sort_index()
# Print the head of weather2
print(weather2.head())
# Sort the index of weather1 in reverse alphabetical order: weather3
weather3 = weather1.sort_index(ascending=False)
# Print the head of weather3
print(weather3.head())
# Sort weather1 numerically using the values of 'Max TemperatureF': weather4
weather4 = weather1.sort_index(by='Max TemperatureF')
# Print the head of weather4
print(weather4.head())
```

## Reindexing DataFrame from a list
Sorting methods are not the only way to change DataFrame Indexes. There is also the .reindex() method. In this exercise, we'll reindex a DataFrame of quarterly-sampled mean temperature values to contain monthly samples (this is an example of upsampling or increasing the rate of samples, which we may recall from the [pandas Foundations](https://www.datacamp.com/courses/pandas-foundations) course). The original data has the first month's abbreviation of the quarter (three-month interval) on the Index, namely Apr, Jan, Jul, and Oct. This data has been loaded into a DataFrame called weather1 and has been printed in its entirety in the IPython Shell. Notice it has only four rows (corresponding to the first month of each quarter) and that the rows are not sorted chronologically. We'll initially use a list of all twelve month abbreviations and subsequently apply the .ffill() method to forward-fill the null entries when upsampling. This list of month abbreviations has been pre-loaded as year.

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Reindex weather1 using the list year: weather2
weather2 = weather1.reindex(year)
# Print weather2
print(weather2)
# Reindex weather1 using the list year with forward-fill: weather3
weather3 = weather1.reindex(year).ffill()
# Print weather3
print(weather3)
```

## Reindexing using another DataFrame Index
Another common technique is to reindex a DataFrame using the Index of another DataFrame. The DataFrame .reindex() method can accept the Index of a DataFrame or Series as input. We can access the Index of a DataFrame with its .index attribute. The [Baby Names Dataset](https://www.data.gov/developers/baby-names-dataset/) from [data.gov](http://data.gov/) summarizes counts of names (with genders) from births registered in the US since 1881. In this exercise, we will start with two baby-names DataFrames names_1981 and names_1881 loaded for us. The DataFrames names_1981 and names_1881 both have a MultiIndex with levels name and gender giving unique labels to counts in each row. If you're interested in seeing how the MultiIndexes were set up, names_1981 and names_1881 were read in using the following commands:
```
names_1981 = pd.read_csv('names1981.csv', header=None, names=['name','gender','count'], index_col=(0,1))
names_1881 = pd.read_csv('names1881.csv', header=None, names=['name','gender','count'], index_col=(0,1))
```
As you can see by looking at their shapes, which have been printed in the IPython Shell, the DataFrame corresponding to 1981 births is much larger, reflecting the greater diversity of names in 1981 as compared to 1881. Or job here is to use the DataFrame .reindex() and .dropna() methods to make a DataFrame common_names counting names from 1881 that were still popular in 1981.

```python
# Import pandas
import pandas as pd
# Reindex names_1981 with index of names_1881: common_names
common_names = names_1981.reindex(names_1881.index)
# Print shape of common_names
print(common_names.shape)
# Drop rows with null counts: common_names
common_names = common_names.dropna()
# Print shape of new common_names
print(common_names.shape)
```
