---
title: "Introduction to Data Visualization with Python"
date: 2018-10-29
tags: [python]
header:
  images:
excerpt: "Introduction to Data Visualization with Python"
---

## Multiple plots on single axis
It is time now to put together some of what we have learned and combine line plots on a common set of axes. The data set here comes from records of undergraduate degrees awarded to women in a variety of fields from 1970 to 2011. We can compare trends in degrees most easily by viewing two curves on the same set of axes.

Here, three NumPy arrays are available for us: year (enumerating years from 1970 to 2011 inclusive), physical_sciences (representing the percentage of Physical Sciences degrees awarded to women each in corresponding year), and computer_science (representing the percentage of Computer Science degrees awarded to women in each corresponding year).

We will issue two plt.plot() commands to draw line plots of different colors on the same set of axes. Here, year represents the x-axis, while physical_sciences and computer_science are the y-axes.

```python
# Import matplotlib.pyplot
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Plot in blue the % of degrees awarded to women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences , color='blue')
# Plot in red the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science
plt.plot(year, computer_science , color='red')
# Display the plot
plt.show()
```

## Using axes()
Rather than overlaying line plots on common axes, we may prefer to plot different line plots on distinct axes. The command plt.axes() is one way to do this (but it requires specifying coordinates relative to the size of the figure).

Here, we have the same three arrays year, physical_sciences, and computer_science representing percentages of degrees awarded to women over a range of years. We will use plt.axes() to create separate sets of axes in which you will draw each line plot.

In calling plt.axes([xlo, ylo, width, height]), a set of axes is created and made active with lower corner at coordinates (xlo, ylo) of the specified width and height. Note that these coordinates can be passed to plt.axes() in the form of a list or a tuple.

The coordinates and lengths are values between 0 and 1 representing lengths relative to the dimensions of the figure. After issuing a plt.axes() command, plots generated are put in that set of axes.

```python
# Create plot axes for the first line plot
plt.axes([0.05, 0.05, 0.425, 0.9])
# Plot in blue the % of degrees awarded to women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue')
# Create plot axes for the second line plot
plt.axes([0.525, 0.05, 0.425, 0.9])
# Plot in red the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red')
# Display the plot
plt.show()
```

## Using subplot()
The command plt.axes() requires a lot of effort to use well because the coordinates of the axes need to be set manually. A better alternative is to use plt.subplot() to determine the layout automatically.

In this exercise, we will continue working with the same arrays from the previous exercises: year, physical_sciences, and computer_science. Rather than using plt.axes() to explicitly lay out the axes, we will use plt.subplot(m, n, k) to make the subplot grid of dimensions m by n and to make the kth subplot active (subplots are numbered starting from 1 row-wise from the top left corner of the subplot grid).

```python
# Create a figure with 1x2 subplot and make the left subplot active
plt.subplot(1,2,1)
# Plot in blue the % of degrees awarded to women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue')
plt.title('Physical Sciences')
# Make the right subplot active in the current 1x2 subplot grid
plt.subplot(1,2,2)
# Plot in red the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red')
plt.title('Computer Science')
# Use plt.tight_layout() to improve the spacing between subplots
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

Now we have some familiarity with plt.subplot(), we can use it to plot more plots in larger grids of subplots of the same figure. Here, we will make a 2×2 grid of subplots and plot the percentage of degrees awarded to women in Physical Sciences (using physical_sciences), in Computer Science (using computer_science), in Health Professions (using health), and in Education (using education).

```python
# Create a figure with 2x2 subplot layout and make the top left subplot active
plt.subplot(2,2,1)
# Plot in blue the % of degrees awarded to women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year,physical_sciences, color='blue')
plt.title('Physical Sciences')
# Make the top right subplot active in the current 2x2 subplot grid
plt.subplot(2,2,2)
# Plot in red the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science
plt.plot(year,computer_science, color='red')
plt.title('Computer Science')
# Make the bottom left subplot active in the current 2x2 subplot grid
plt.subplot(2,2,3)
# Plot in green the % of degrees awarded to women in Health Professions
plt.plot(year, health, color='green')
plt.title('Health Professions')
# Make the bottom right subplot active in the current 2x2 subplot grid
plt.subplot(2,2,4)
# Plot in yellow the % of degrees awarded to women in Education
plt.plot(year, education, color='yellow')
plt.title('Education')
# Improve the spacing between subplots and display them
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Using xlim(), ylim()
In this exercise, we will work with the matplotlib.pyplot interface to quickly set the x- and y-limits of your plots. We will now create the same figure as in the previous exercise using plt.plot(), this time setting the axis extents using plt.xlim() and plt.ylim(). These commands allow us to either zoom or expand the plot or to set the axis ranges to include important values (such as the origin).

In this exercise, as before, the percentage of women graduates in Computer Science and in the Physical Sciences are held in the variables computer_science and physical_sciences respectively over year. After creating the plot, we will use plt.savefig() to export the image produced to a file.

```python
# Plot the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science and the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red')
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue')
# Add the axis labels
plt.xlabel('Year')
plt.ylabel('Degrees awarded to women (%)')
# Set the x-axis range
plt.xlim(1990, 2010)
# Set the y-axis range
plt.ylim(0, 50)
# Add a title and display the plot
plt.title('Degrees awarded to women (1990-2010)\nComputer Science (red)\nPhysical Sciences (blue)')
plt.show()
# Save the image as 'xlim_and_ylim.png'
plt.show()
plt.savefig('xlim_and_ylim.png')
```

## Using axis()
Using plt.xlim() and plt.ylim() are useful for setting the axis limits individually. In this exercise, we will see how we can pass a 4-tuple to plt.axis() to set limits for both axes at once. For example, plt.axis((1980,1990,0,75)) would set the extent of the x-axis to the period between 1980 and 1990, and would set the y-axis extent from 0 to 75% degrees award.

```python
# Plot in blue the % of degrees awarded to women in Computer Science
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='blue')
# Plot in red the % of degrees awarded to women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='red')
# Set the x-axis and y-axis limits
plt.axis((1990,2010,0,50))
# Show the figure
plt.show()
# Save the figure as 'axis_limits.png'
plt.savefig('axis_limits.png')
```

## Using legend()
Legends are useful for distinguishing between multiple datasets displayed on common axes. The relevant data are created using specific line colors or markers in various plot commands. Using the keyword argument label in the plotting function associates a string to use in a legend. For example, here, we will plot enrollment of women in the Physical Sciences and in Computer Science over time. We can label each curve by passing a label argument to the plotting call, and request a legend using plt.legend(). Specifying the keyword argument loc determines where the legend will be placed.

```python
# Specify the label 'Computer Science'
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red', label='Computer Science')
# Specify the label 'Physical Sciences'
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue', label='Physical Sciences' )
# Add a legend at the lower center
plt.legend(loc='lower center')
# Add axis labels and title
plt.xlabel('Year')
plt.ylabel('Enrollment (%)')
plt.title('Undergraduate enrollment of women')
plt.show()
```

## Using annotate()
It is often useful to annotate a simple plot to provide context. This makes the plot more readable and can highlight specific aspects of the data. Annotations like text and arrows can be used to emphasize specific observations. Here, we will once again plot enrollment of women in the Physical Sciences and Computer science over time. The legend is set up as before. Additionally, we will mark the inflection point when enrollment of women in Computer Science reached a peak and started declining using plt.annotate(). To enable an arrow, set arrowprops=dict(facecolor='black'). The arrow will point to the location given by xy and the text will appear at the location given by xytext.

```python
# Plot with legend as before
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red', label='Computer Science')
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue', label='Physical Sciences')
plt.legend(loc='lower right')
# Compute the maximum enrollment of women in Computer Science: cs_max
cs_max = computer_science.max()
# Calculate the year in which there was maximum enrollment of women in Computer Science: yr_max
yr_max = year[computer_science.argmax()]
# Add a black arrow annotation
plt.annotate('Maximum', xy=(yr_max,cs_max), xytext= (yr_max+5, cs_max+5), arrowprops=dict(facecolor='black'))
# Add axis labels and title
plt.xlabel('Year')
plt.ylabel('Enrollment (%)')
plt.title('Undergraduate enrollment of women')
plt.show()
```

## Modifying styles
Matplotlib comes with a number of different stylesheets to customize the overall look of different plots. To activate a particular stylesheet we can simply call plt.style.use() with the name of the style sheet you want. To list all the available style sheets we can execute: print(plt.style.available).

```python
# Import matplotlib.pyplot
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Set the style to 'ggplot'
plt.style.use('ggplot')
# Create a figure with 2x2 subplot layout
plt.subplot(2, 2, 1)
# Plot the enrollment % of women in the Physical Sciences
plt.plot(year, physical_sciences, color='blue')
plt.title('Physical Sciences')
# Plot the enrollment % of women in Computer Science
plt.subplot(2, 2, 2)
plt.plot(year, computer_science, color='red')
plt.title('Computer Science')
# Add annotation
cs_max = computer_science.max()
yr_max = year[computer_science.argmax()]
plt.annotate('Maximum', xy=(yr_max, cs_max), xytext=(yr_max-1, cs_max-10), arrowprops=dict(facecolor='black'))
# Plot the enrollmment % of women in Health professions
plt.subplot(2, 2, 3)
plt.plot(year, health, color='green')
plt.title('Health Professions')
# Plot the enrollment % of women in Education
plt.subplot(2, 2, 4)
plt.plot(year, education, color='yellow')
plt.title('Education')
# Improve spacing between subplots and display them
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Generating meshes
In order to visualize two-dimensional arrays of data, it is necessary to understand how to generate and manipulate 2-D arrays. Many Matplotlib plots support arrays as input and in particular, they support NumPy arrays. The NumPy library is the most widely-supported means for supporting numeric arrays in Python. In this exercise, we will use the meshgrid function in NumPy to generate 2-D arrays which we will then visualize using plt.imshow(). The simplest way to generate a meshgrid is as follows:
```
import numpy as np
Y,X = np.meshgrid(range(10),range(20))
```
This will create two arrays with a shape of (20,10), which corresponds to 20 rows along the Y-axis and 10 columns along the X-axis. In this exercise, we will use np.meshgrid() to generate a regular 2-D sampling of a mathematical function.

```python
# Import numpy and matplotlib.pyplot
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# Generate two 1-D arrays: u, v
u = np.linspace(-2,2, 41)
v = np.linspace(-1,1, 21)
# Generate 2-D arrays from u and v: X, Y
X,Y = np.meshgrid(u,v)
# Compute Z based on X and Y
Z = np.sin(3*np.sqrt(X**2 + Y**2))
# Display the resulting image with pcolor()
plt.pcolor(Z)
plt.show()
# Save the figure to 'sine_mesh.png'
plt.savefig('sine_mesh.png')
```

## Contour & filled contour plots
Although plt.imshow() or plt.pcolor() are often used to visualize a 2-D array in entirety, there are other ways of visualizing such data without displaying all the available sample values. One option is to use the array to compute contours that are visualized instead. Two types of contour plot supported by Matplotlib are plt.contour() and plt.contourf() where the former displays the contours as lines and the latter displayed filled areas between contours. Both these plotting commands accept a two dimensional array from which the appropriate contours are computed.

In this exercise, we will visualize a 2-D array repeatedly using both plt.contour() and plt.contourf(). We will use plt.subplot() to display several contour plots in a common figure, using the meshgrid X, Y as the axes. For example, plt.contour(X, Y, Z) generates a default contour map of the array Z.

```python
# Generate a default contour map of the array Z
plt.subplot(2,2,1)
plt.contour(X,Y,Z)
# Generate a contour map with 20 contours
plt.subplot(2,2,2)
plt.contour(X,Y,Z,20)
# Generate a default filled contour map of the array Z
plt.subplot(2,2,3)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z)
# Generate a default filled contour map with 20 contours
plt.subplot(2,2,4)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z,20)
# Improve the spacing between subplots
plt.tight_layout()
# Display the figure
plt.show()
```

## Modifying colormaps
When displaying a 2-D array with plt.imshow() or plt.pcolor(), the values of the array are mapped to a corresponding color. The set of colors used is determined by a colormap which smoothly maps values to colors, making it easy to understand the structure of the data at a glance. It is often useful to change the colormap from the default 'jet' colormap used by matplotlib. A good colormap is visually pleasing and conveys the structure of the data faithfully and in a way that makes sense for the application.

* Some matplotlib colormaps have unique names such as 'jet', 'coolwarm', 'magma' and 'viridis'.
* Others have a naming scheme based on overall color such as 'Greens', 'Blues', 'Reds', and 'Purples'.
* Another four colormaps are based on the seasons, namely 'summer', 'autumn', 'winter' and 'spring'.
* You can insert the option cmap=<name> into most matplotlib functions to change the color map of the resulting plot.
In this exercise, we will explore four different colormaps together using plt.subplot(). We will use a pregenerated array Z and a meshgrid X, Y to generate the same filled contour plot with four different color maps. Be sure to also add a color bar to each filled contour plot with plt.colorbar().

```python
# Create a filled contour plot with a color map of 'viridis'
plt.subplot(2,2,1)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z,20, cmap='viridis')
plt.colorbar()
plt.title('Viridis')
# Create a filled contour plot with a color map of 'gray'
plt.subplot(2,2,2)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z,20, cmap='gray')
plt.colorbar()
plt.title('Gray')
# Create a filled contour plot with a color map of 'autumn'
plt.subplot(2,2,3)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z,20, cmap='autumn')
plt.colorbar()
plt.title('Autumn')
# Create a filled contour plot with a color map of 'winter'
plt.subplot(2,2,4)
plt.contourf(X,Y,Z,20, cmap='winter')
plt.colorbar()
plt.title('Winter')
# Improve the spacing between subplots and display them
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Using hist2d()
Given a set of ordered pairs describing data points, we can count the number of points with similar values to construct a two-dimensional histogram. This is similar to a one-dimensional histogram, but it describes the joint variation of two random variables rather than just one. In matplotlib, one function to visualize 2-D histograms is plt.hist2d().

* You specify the coordinates of the points using plt.hist2d(x,y) assuming x and y are two vectors of the same length.
* You can specify the number of bins with the argument bins=(nx, ny) where nx is the number of bins to use in the horizontal direction and ny is the number of bins to use in the vertical direction.
* You can specify the rectangular region in which the samples are counted in constructing the 2D histogram. The optional parameter required is range=((xmin, xmax), (ymin, ymax)) where
* xmin and xmax are the respective lower and upper limits for the variables on the x-axis and
* ymin and ymax are the respective lower and upper limits for the variables on the y-axis. Notice that the optional range argument can use nested tuples or lists.
In this exercise, we'll use some data from the auto-mpg data set. There are two arrays mpg and hp that respectively contain miles per gallon and horse power ratings from over three hundred automobiles built.

```python
# Generate a 2-D histogram
plt.hist2d(y=mpg, x=hp, bins=(20,20), range=((40,235),(8,48)))
# Add a color bar to the histogram
plt.colorbar()
# Add labels, title, and display the plot
plt.xlabel('Horse power [hp]')
plt.ylabel('Miles per gallon [mpg]')
plt.title('hist2d() plot')
plt.show()
```

## Using hexbin()
The function plt.hist2d() uses rectangular bins to construct a two dimensional histogram. As an alternative, the function plt.hexbin() uses hexagonal bins. The underlying algorithm (based on this article from 1987) constructs a hexagonal tesselation of a planar region and aggregates points inside hexagonal bins.

* The optional gridsize argument (default 100) gives the number of hexagons across the x-direction used in the hexagonal tiling. If specified as a list or a tuple of length two, gridsize fixes the number of hexagon in the x- and y-directions respectively in the tiling.
* The optional parameter extent=(xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax) specifies rectangular region covered by the hexagonal tiling. In that case, xmin and xmax are the respective lower and upper limits for the variables on the x-axis and ymin and ymax are the respective lower and upper limits for the variables on the y-axis.
In this exercise, we'll use the same auto-mpg data as in the last exercise (again using arrays mpg and hp). This time, we'll use plt.hexbin() to visualize the two-dimensional histogram.

```python
# Generate a 2d histogram with hexagonal bins
plt.hexbin(x=hp, y=mpg, gridsize=(15,12), extent=(40, 235, 8, 48))
# Add a color bar to the histogram
plt.colorbar()
# Add labels, title, and display the plot
plt.xlabel('Horse power [hp]')
plt.ylabel('Miles per gallon [mpg]')
plt.title('hexbin() plot')
plt.show()
```

## Loading, examining images
Color images such as photographs contain the intensity of the red, green and blue color channels.

* To read an image from file, use plt.imread() by passing the path to a file, such as a PNG or JPG file.
* The color image can be plotted as usual using plt.imshow().
* The resulting image loaded is a NumPy array of three dimensions. The array typically has dimensions M×N×3, where M×N is the dimensions of the image. The third dimensions are referred to as color channels (typically red, green, and blue).
* The color channels can be extracted by Numpy array slicing.
In this exercise, we will load & display [an image of an astronaut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Astronaut-EVA.jpg) (by NASA (Public domain), via [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/)). You will also examine its attributes to understand how color images are represented.

```python
# Load the image into an array: img
img = plt.imread('480px-Astronaut-EVA.jpg')
# Print the shape of the image
print(img.shape)
# Display the image
plt.imshow(img)
# Hide the axes
plt.axis('off')
plt.show()
```

## Pseudocolor plot from image data
Image data comes in many forms and it is not always appropriate to display the available channels in RGB space. In many situations, an image may be processed and analysed in some way before it is visualized in pseudocolor, also known as 'false' color. In this exercise, we will perform a simple analysis using the image showing an astronaut as viewed from space. Instead of simply displaying the image, we will compute the total intensity across the red, green and blue channels. The result is a single two dimensional array which you will display using plt.imshow() with the 'gray' colormap.

```python
# Load the image into an array: img
img = plt.imread('480px-Astronaut-EVA.jpg')
# Print the shape of the image
print(img.shape)
# Compute the sum of the red, green and blue channels: intensity
intensity = img.sum(axis=2)
# Print the shape of the intensity
print(intensity.shape)
# Display the intensity with a colormap of 'gray'
plt.imshow(intensity,cmap='gray')
# Add a colorbar
plt.colorbar()
# Hide the axes and show the figure
plt.axis('off')
plt.show()
```

## Extent and aspect
When using plt.imshow() to display an array, the default behavior is to keep pixels square so that the height to width ratio of the output matches the ratio determined by the shape of the array. In addition, by default, the x- and y-axes are labeled by the number of samples in each direction. The ratio of the displayed width to height is known as the image aspect and the range used to label the x- and y-axes is known as the image extent. The default aspect value of 'auto' keeps the pixels square and the extents are automatically computed from the shape of the array if not specified otherwise. In this exercise, we will investigate how to set these options explicitly by plotting the same image in a 2 by 2 grid of subplots with distinct aspect and extent options.

```python
# Load the image into an array: img
img = plt.imread('480px-Astronaut-EVA.jpg')
# Specify the extent and aspect ratio of the top left subplot
plt.subplot(2,2,1)
plt.title('extent=(-1,1,-1,1),\naspect=0.5')
plt.xticks([-1,0,1])
plt.yticks([-1,0,1])
plt.imshow(img, extent=(-1,1,-1,1), aspect=0.5)
# Specify the extent and aspect ratio of the top right subplot
plt.subplot(2,2,2)
plt.title('extent=(-1,1,-1,1),\naspect=1')
plt.xticks([-1,0,1])
plt.yticks([-1,0,1])
plt.imshow(img, extent=(-1,1,-1,1), aspect=1)
# Specify the extent and aspect ratio of the bottom left subplot
plt.subplot(2,2,3)
plt.title('extent=(-1,1,-1,1),\naspect=2')
plt.xticks([-1,0,1])
plt.yticks([-1,0,1])
plt.imshow(img, extent=(-1,1,-1,1), aspect=2)
# Specify the extent and aspect ratio of the bottom right subplot
plt.subplot(2,2,4)
plt.title('extent=(-2,2,-1,1),\naspect=2')
plt.xticks([-2,-1,0,1,2])
plt.yticks([-1,0,1])
plt.imshow(img, extent=(-2,2,-1,1), aspect=2)
# Improve spacing and display the figure
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
```

## Rescaling pixel intensities
Sometimes, low contrast images can be improved by rescaling their intensities. For instance, [this image of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Unequalized_Hawkes_Bay_NZ.jpg) (originally by Phillip Capper, modified by User:Konstable, via Wikimedia Commons, [CC BY 2.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0)) has no pixel values near 0 or near 255 (the limits of valid intensities). For this exercise, we will do a simple rescaling (remember, an image is NumPy array) to translate and stretch the pixel intensities so that the intensities of the new image fill the range from 0 to 255.

```python
# Load the image into an array: image
image = plt.imread('640px-Unequalized_Hawkes_Bay_NZ.jpg')
# Extract minimum and maximum values from the image: pmin, pmax
pmin, pmax = image.min(), image.max()
print("The smallest & largest pixel intensities are %d & %d." % (pmin, pmax))
# Rescale the pixels: rescaled_image
rescaled_image = 256*(image-pmin)/(pmax-pmin)
print("The rescaled smallest & largest pixel intensities are %.1f & %.1f." %
      (rescaled_image.min(), rescaled_image.max()))
# Display the original image in the top subplot
plt.subplot(2,1,1)
plt.title('original image')
plt.axis('off')
plt.imshow(image)
# Display the rescaled image in the bottom subplot
plt.subplot(2,1,2)
plt.title('rescaled image')
plt.axis('off')
plt.imshow(rescaled_image)
plt.show()
```
